The Comparative Politics Seminar Series in the Department of Political
and Social Sciences at the European University Institute is a venue for
the presentation of work in progress by scholars from across the
subfield of comparative politics.

It usually takes place on Thursdays from 17:00 to 18:30 at Seminar Room
2, in Badia Fiesolana (Fiesole). See below or sync the
[calendar](webcal://raw.githubusercontent.com/cpss-eui/cpss-eui.github.io/main/events.ics)
for the exact location for each meeting. See [previous
events](https://cpss-eui.github.io/old_events.html).

The series is organized by [Elias
Dinas](https://www.eui.eu/people?id=elias-dinas), [Miriam
Golden](https://www.miriamgolden.com/), [Simon
Hix](https://simonhix.com//), and [Filip
Kostelka](https://filipkostelka.com/), with support by [Daniel
Urquijo](https://www.eui.eu/people?id=daniel-urquijo) and [Pau
Grau](https://paugrau.cat/).

Upcoming Events
===============

Speakers during Spring 2024
---------------------------

Thursday 04 April 2024 | Seminar Room 2
<p>
<strong><a href='http://www.laurenelyssayoung.com/'>Lauren E. Young (UC
Davis)</a></strong>
</p>

**The ethics of asking about violence: Early evidence from a multisite
experiment**

<details>
<summary>Abstract:</summary>
<p>
Political violence – including civil war, organized crime, and violent
extremism – is a major driver of human suffering around the world.
According to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, more
than 100 million people, or one in every 78 people on earth, were
displaced because of conflict or violence in 2022. Over the past two
decades, there has been a proliferation of research involving human
participants on the topic of violence in the social and behavioral
sciences. However, we have surprisingly little evidence about how
participating in research that asks about violence affects participants
and whether we are effectively adhering to principles around respect for
persons when doing research on this especially sensitive and high-stakes
topic. This talk will present preliminary evidence from a systematic
review and multisite experiment to measure the effects of participating
in research on violence and develop new methods to maximize adherence to
the ethical principles of respect for persons and beneficence.
</p>
</details>
<hr>
Thursday 18 April 2024 | Seminar Room 2
<p>
<strong><a href='https://pfernandezvazquez.com'>Pablo
Fernandez-Vazquez</a></strong>
</p>

**Undoing Insulation: Politicization and Revolving Doors in a Closed
Weberian Bureaucracy**

<details>
<summary>Abstract:</summary>
<p>
Academic and policy discussions regarding the bureaucracy often advocate
for robust civil service systems, incorporating meritocratic entrance
exams, competitive salaries, and lifelong tenure in order to curb
political influence and promote effective governance. Using a unique and
comprehensive administrative dataset covering the selection and careers
of various elite civil service corps in Spain from 1940 to 2023, we
unveil striking patterns that challenge conventional wisdom about
Weberian bureaucracies. First, our findings reveal that a substantial
portion of elite civil servants depart from the corps to pursue roles in
the private sector or assume high-level political positions. Second, we
identify pronounced partisan patterns in the recruitment of elite civil
servants for top-tier political appointments, with certain corps
consistently aligned with the left while others lean towards the right.
Third, we show that while these elite civil service corps have become
more diverse in terms of gender, they remain largely biased in their
socioeconomic profile. In summary, our study demonstrates that the
formal insulation and meritocratic principles of Weberian bureaucracies
can coexist with enduring socioeconomic biases and the integration of
bureaucratic, political, and corporate career paths.
</p>
</details>
<hr>
Friday 26 April 2024 | Sala del Capitolo
<p>
<strong><a href='https://rachelbernhard.com/'>Rachel Bernhard
(Oxford)</a></strong>
</p>

**A Rich Woman’s World? Wealth and Gendered Paths to Office**

<details>
<summary>Abstract:</summary>
<p>
We introduce and seek to explain a new and surprising fact about members
of the US Congress: since at least the 1980s, Congresswomen have been
substantially wealthier than Congressmen serving in the same party and
decade. We articulate three mechanisms that could explain this gender
wealth gap, and use new data on the backgrounds and families of members
of Congress to evaluate each mechanism. We find no evidence that the
wealth gap arises because districts likely to elect women also elect
wealthier members, or because women had more lucrative pre-Congressional
careers. We do find evidence that the gap can be explained by women
facing steeper challenges that wealth helps them overcome—particularly
related to caregiving—and by Congresswomen’s spouses earning more money
than Congressmen’s spouses. Our analysis sheds light on how obstacles
facing ambitious women can lead to apparently counterintuitive
advantages among the women who manage to succeed.
</p>
</details>
<hr>
Thursday 02 May 2024 | Seminar Room 2
<p>
<strong><a href='https://ericdickson.net/'>Eric Dickson
(NYU)</a></strong>
</p>

**Public Knowledge of Political Psychology and Its Electoral
Consequences**

<details>
<summary>Abstract:</summary>
<p>
Politicians use a variety of psychological techniques to sway voters and
win support in elections. For instance, politicians often attempt to
instill fear in members of the public, or grossly exaggerate (or
willfully minimize) potential threats to society. Political psychology
studies the ways in which such campaign techniques can potentially
affect voters. Crucially, people are often unaware (or incompletely
aware) of their emotional states, the effects their emotions have on
their political judgments, or how political actors attempt to manipulate
their emotions. Can educating members of the public about ideas from
political psychology improve their awareness of these psychological
phenomena? Would such awareness have downstream impact on the
effectiveness of such manipulative campaigning techniques, and voters’
evaluations of politicians who employ them? This talk presents ideas for
an experimental design exploring these questions. A future goal of the
project will be the development of a behavioral game-theoretic model of
emotional manipulation in election campaigning that would highlight the
mechanisms through which higher public awareness of ideas from political
psychology could potentially shape politicians’ incentives to use
manipulative campaign techniques (or not to) in equilibrium.
</p>
</details>
<hr>
Thursday 16 May 2024 | Seminar Room 2
<p>
<strong><a href='https://anselmhager.com/'>Anselm Hager
(Humboldt)</a></strong>
</p>

**Mutual Knowledge of Social Norms and Political Activism**

<details>
<summary>Abstract:</summary>
<p>
Social norms are important drivers of human behavior. Problematically,
when individuals hold incorrect beliefs about others’ opinions, a norm
may be sustained even if a majority is against it (pluralistic
ignorance). However, it may not be sufficient to correct such
misperceptions as citizens may continue to believe that others do not
share the updated beliefs. In this case, creating mutual knowledge about
social norms may be necessary to induce behavioral change. We implement
a field experiment in Kyrgyzstan to test this hypothesis. We vary i)
whether women are provided with information on high social support for
female political engagement, and ii) whether women are informed that
this information is also provided to other women (“mutual knowledge”).
We find that providing information about high societal support has no
effect on women’s political engagement. However, women become less
engaged when we also experimentally create mutual knowledge about the
social norm opposing female engagement. Yet, there is no positive effect
on female engagement when providing mutual knowledge about high social
support. Using vignette experiments, we show that the asymmetry arises
because women fear community punishment—in case they are more active
than socially desired—more so than potential community praise when they
become active when more engagement is desired.
</p>
</details>
<hr>
Thursday 06 June 2024 | Seminar Room 2
<p>
<strong><a href='http://www.jacobnyrup.dk'>Jacob Nyrup (University of
Oslo)</a></strong>
</p>

**Paths to power: A new dataset on the social profile of governments
(with Carl Henrik Knutsen, Peter Egge Langsæther, and Ina Lyftingsmo
Kristiansen, University of Oslo)**

<details>
<summary>Abstract:</summary>
<p>
Systematized information on the background of cabinet ministers across
long time-periods and all geographical regions remains limited. Hence,
many questions related to the role of class, education, occupation, and
geography in political representation remain hard to address. To enable
such studies, we introduce Paths to Power (PtP), a dataset on the
educational, occupational, and social background of cabinet ministers.
PtP contains detailed individual- level data for cabinet members from
130 countries across 1966-2021. We first detail the data gathering
process and discuss validity properties. We then demonstrate how PtP can
be used to gain new insights using descriptive statistics and two
applications. In the first application, we consider variation in cabinet
working class representation, suggesting that autocratic regime ideology
and party composition of democratic governments shape this. Next, we
replicate the established finding that democracies have more educated
leaders than autocracies, and then find that autocracies have similarly
well-educated cabinet ministers.
</p>
</details>
<hr>
